# CMSC471 Final Project: The Mental Health Lifestyle

This project explores mental health trends across the U.S. over the past few decades. It combines data from multiple sources, including Reddit, the CDC 500 Cities & PLACES dataset, and the CDC NHANES dataset, in order to provide a well-rounded view of the mental health crisis, including public response, geographic patterns, and demographic factors that contribute to increased risk of developing a mental health problem. We consider issues like age, sex, and lifestyle to understand who is most affected by the mental health crisis and how. We found that mental health subreddits have increased in popularity significantly since 2011, with depression and depression-related subreddits dominating. Certain areas of the U.S., such as the northwest and Appalachian regions, have higher rates of depression, although these rates appear to be going up in many places. Depression burden is highest among people who are women, young, overweight or underweight, and have abnormal sleeping habits. While causation is not established by these visualizations, we can see clear trends that can inform future mental health interventions. 

## Member Contributions and Process
We split the work up by visualization: Alice worked on the Reddit visualization, Margaret worked on the map visualization, and Phani worked on the demographic visualizations. Individual reflections are recorded below.

**Alice**:
The reddit post tracking data is organized from the Subreddit comments/submissions 2005-06 to 2025-12 academic torrents data set by a customly written .ipynb script. \
The approach is inspired by the paper "Natural Language Processing Reveals Vulnerable Mental Health Support Groups and Heightened Health Anxiety on Reddit During COVID-19: Observational Study" by Low et al. The paper selected 15 largest mental health support groups on Reddit and examined/characterized the changes of these groups during the covid pandemic using NLP. We initially attempted to use the dataset published along with the paper and visualize the changes in sentiment in the mental health support subreddits during covid and see if there was a correlation between the change in sentiment and the number of posts with the number of cases per day. However, not much significant correlation was found so that approach had to be abandoned. Inspired by the paper, after the abandonment of the first approach, we also attempted to follow the NLP analysis pipeline in the paper to extrapolate and analyze the sentiment change by training models to classify whether a post belongs to each mental health related subreddit or the control. We try to apply the models on submission texts posted in the subreddit r/mentalhealth since it is a combined subreddit for all mental health concerns. However the finding does not reveal the prevalence of depression which is our project;s overall focus, so it has to be abandoned as well. \
However during this exploration process, we did noticed the fact that the number of submissions posted in r/depression towers the post counts in all other mental health subreddits. Because of that, we decided to shift our approach to visualize and analyze the growth of mental health subreddit over a longer period instead. The csv dataset published by Low et al contains post counts from 2018 to 2020-04 only so we turned to the academic torrents data and downloaded the raw data for 13 instead of 15 mental health related subreddits. As well as some popular subreddits which serve as controls for estimating the overall/background fluctuation of reddit activity over the 15-year span since the reddit user growth data is not publicly available. \
The layout of the visualization is inspired by the "A 3-D View of a Chart That Predicts
The Economic Future: The Yield Curve" visualization published on the New York Times by By GREGOR AISCH and AMANDA COX on MARCH 18, 2015. 

**Margaret**: For the map visualization, we wanted to avoid an issue that we had with a previous visualization, where it would take a long time to load due to frontloaded heavy data operations. Therefore, each year's data was manually copied and pasted into a single csv file that was then used as the data source for this site. During this process, we ran into the issue of less data than expected -- while the 500 Places dataset includes releases from 2016-2025, once I inspected it more closely we found that only 2020, 2021, and 2023 had usable depression data. Therefore, we slightly adjusted our track for this visualization and the following NHANES one to only include that timeframe. The map itself was based on a sample visualization found online (https://observablehq.com/@d3/choropleth/2). This visualization utilizes filtering to select data for different years, panning/zooming to allow the user to view specific areas, and tooltips to display the details for specific counties on hover. We chose purple to both match with the web page color scheme and because blue is often associated with sadness in pop culture; since we used blue for the web page, purple was the closest visual encoding matching the content of the visualization. I also worked on the overall layout of the webpage, creating a framework of divs and styles to unify our different visualizations at the beginning of the project and pulling them together into one story via captions and buttons at the end.

**Phani**: For the demographic visualizations, I utilized the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) dataset. The storytelling inspiration came from a group from previous years: https://kcristinalee.github.io/F/. My process involved significant data engineering and a steep learning curve regarding complex survey design. Because NHANES is distributed across multiple specialized files, I spent considerable time writing scripts to join demographic data with the Mental Health - Depression Screener (PHQ-9) files using unique sequence identifiers.
A major turning point in my process was the realization that a simple arithmetic average of the survey scores would yield biased results. NHANES oversamples specific populations to ensure reliability, meaning I had to pivot from standard calculations to using complex survey weights ($WTMEC2YR$). This shift was technically challenging and initially "broke" all of the visualizations I had already built, as the data structure and scale (moving from raw averages to nationally representative population estimates) changed entirely. I had to restart the visualization pipeline, ensuring that my Python preprocessing scripts correctly handled NHANES-specific missing value sentinels (like 7.0 and 9.0 for "Refused" or "Don't Know") and properly formatted the new calculated columns for D3.js. 
Finally, to ensure the narrative was impactful instead of overwhelming, I performed an exploratory analysis on a wide range of variables, including gender, age, BMI, and sleep patterns. I deliberately narrowed the scope to those four most interesting and prevalent correlations. This allowed the final story to focus on the most meaningful trends in the U.S. population’s depression burden without cluttering the user experience with redundant data.

## AI Usage
AI was used to assist in the development of this webpage. The basic layout and functionality was built manually, but for implementing advanced features such as dynamically updating which visualizations are visible, AI inluding ChatGPT and Cursor was consulted.

## Extra Credit Features
1) Manual data curation -- we ended up pulling from many different data sources that had to be curated manually. Given the format of the data releases provided by the CDC, the NHANES and 500 Places datasets had to be pasted together before coding the visualization even started. This effort also helped with the user experience: by avoiding parsing or combining several datasets on load, we ensure that the user can interact freely with the visualizations. 
2) Multiple forms of interaction per visualization -- in addition to the overall layout of the web page, which allows the user to move through the story self-paced, the Reddit visualizations and map visualizations themselves are highly interactive. In particular, the Reddit visualization makes use of both storytelling tabs and features like zooming, filtering, and hovering, with novel interaction like the year zoom-in to quarters that was not utilized in past labs or projects.

## Data Sources
- [https://academictorrents.com/details/3e3f64dee22dc304cdd2546254ca1f8e8ae542b4](https://academictorrents.com/details/3e3f64dee22dc304cdd2546254ca1f8e8ae542b4)
- [https://data.cdc.gov/browse?category=500+Cities+%26+Places&q=2025&sortBy=relevance&tags=places&pageSize=20](https://www.cdc.gov/places/index.html)
- [https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/](https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/)
